[{"name": "Oliver O. Aalami, MD", "bio": null, "publications": {"Vascular1: Evaluation of a Virtual Reality Ultrasound Guided Femoral Artery Access Training Module": "", "Mobile Engagement for Walking in Patients With Claudication": "", "National Assessment of Availability, Awareness, and Utilization of Supervised Exercise Therapy for Peripheral Artery Disease in Patients With Intermittent Claudication": "", "A mouse model of mandibular distraction osteogenesis": "", "Microarray analysis of regional patterning of suture-specific dura mater": "", "Cranial suture fate in an in vitro organ culture model": "", "Establishment of a young-versus-adult mouse calvarial defect model": "", "Analysis of de novo bone formation by dura-derived TGF-beta signaling": "", "The osteogenic antagonist BMP-3 is down-regulated during programmed suture fusion in the rat": "", "Microarray analysis comparing juvenile and adult dura mater": "", "Clinical validation of smartphone-based activity tracking in peripheral artery disease patients.": "Peripheral artery disease (PAD) is a vascular disease that leads to reduced blood flow to the limbs, often causing claudication symptoms that impair patients' ability to walk. The distance walked during a 6-min walk test (6MWT) correlates well with patient claudication symptoms, so we developed the VascTrac iPhone app as a platform for monitoring PAD using a digital 6MWT. In this study, we evaluate the accuracy of the built-in iPhone distance and step-counting algorithms during 6MWTs. One hundred and fourteen (114) participants with PAD performed a supervised 6MWT using the VascTrac app while simultaneously wearing an ActiGraph GT9X Activity Monitor. Steps and distance-walked during the 6MWT were manually measured and used to assess the bias in the iPhone CMPedometer algorithms. The iPhone CMPedometer step algorithm underestimated steps with a bias of -7.2%\u2009\u00b1\u200913.8% (mean\u2009\u00b1\u2009SD) and had a mean percent difference with the Actigraph (Actigraph-iPhone) of 5.7%\u2009\u00b1\u200920.5%. The iPhone CMPedometer distance algorithm overestimated distance with a bias of 43%\u2009\u00b1\u200942% due to overestimation in stride length. Our correction factor improved distance estimation to 8%\u2009\u00b1\u200932%. The Ankle-Brachial Index (ABI) correlated poorly with steps (R\u2009=\u20090.365) and distance (R\u2009=\u20090.413). Thus, in PAD patients, the iPhone's built-in distance algorithm is unable to accurately measure distance, suggesting that custom algorithms are necessary for using iPhones as a platform for monitoring distance walked in PAD patients. Although the iPhone accurately measured steps, more research is necessary to establish step counting as a clinically meaningful metric for PAD.", "Utilizing Smartphone-Based Machine Learning in Medical Monitor Data Collection: Seven Segment Digit Recognition.": "Biometric measurements captured from medical devices, such as blood pressure gauges, glucose monitors, and weighing scales, are essential to tracking a patient's health. Trends in these measurements can accurately track diabetes, cardiovascular issues, and assist medication management for patients. Currently, patients record their results and date of measurement in a physical notebook. It may be weeks before a doctor sees a patient's records and can assess the health of the patient. With a predicted 6.8 billion smartphones in the world by 20221, health monitoring platforms, such as Apple's HealthKit2, can be leveraged to provide the right care at the right time. This research presents a mobile application that enables users to capture medical monitor data and send it to their doctor swiftly. A key contribution of this paper is a robust engine that can recognize digits from medical monitors with an accuracy of 98.2%.", "Targeting of Sp1 transcription factor: a novel therapeutic approach for Keloids, an in vitro analysis": "Keloid scars are fibroproliferative disorders characterized by the accumulation of extracellular matrix (ECM) components resulting in a fibrotic condition. Several ECM promoters are regulated by Sp1. Thus, our aim was to investigate the role of Sp1 in keloid pathogenesis and investigate the antiproliferative and antifibrotic effects of Wp631 and mitoxantrone, potent inhibitors of Sp1-activated transcription. An elevated level of Sp1 was observed in tissue extracts obtained from keloid tissue. Serum stimulation elevated Sp1 levels in keloid fibroblasts (KF). Under coculture conditions Sp1 seemed to be downregulated. Wp631 and mitoxanthrone in serum growth factors resulted in a reduced expression of ECM components in KF. Both Wp631 and mitoxanthrone were also able to inhibit the proliferation of normal and keloid keratinocytes and fibroblasts significantly. As Wp631 seems to be potent in downregulating the ECM components in KF and also inhibiting the proliferation of these cells it could be explored as a possible therapeutic agent in the treatment of keloids.", "mTOR as a potential therapeutic target for treatment of keloids and excessive scars": "Keloid is a dermal fibroproliferative disorder characterized by excessive deposition of extracellular matrix (ECM) components such as collagen, glycoproteins and fibronectin. The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a serine/theronine kinase which plays an important role in the regulation of metabolic processes and translation rates. Published reports have shown mTOR as regulator of collagen expression and its inhibition induces a decrease in ECM deposition. Our aim was to investigate the role of mTOR in keloid pathogenesis and investigate the effect of rapamycin on proliferating cell nuclear antigen (PCNA), cyclin D1, collagen, fibronectin and alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA) expression in normal fibroblasts (NF) and keloid fibroblasts (KF). Tissue extracts obtained from keloid scar demonstrated elevated expression of mTOR, p70KDa S6 kinase (p70S6K) and their activated forms, suggesting an activated state in keloid scars. Serum stimulation highlighted the heightened responsiveness of KF to mitogens and the importance of mTOR and p70S6K during early phase of wound healing. Application of rapamycin to monoculture NF and KF, dose- and time-dependently downregulates the expression of cytoplasmic PCNA, cyclin D1, fibronectin, collagen and alpha-SMA, demonstrating the anti-proliferative effect and therapeutic potential of rapamycin in the treatment of keloid scars. The inhibitory effect of rapamycin was found to be reversible following recovery in the expression of proteins following the removal of rapamycin from the culture media. These results demonstrate the important role of mTOR in the regulation of cell cycle and the expression of ECM proteins: fibronectin, collagen and alpha-SMA.", "Differential gene expression between juvenile and adult dura mater: A window into what genes play a role in the regeneration of membranous bone": "Although reossification of large calvarial defects is possible in children, adults lack this tissue engineering capacity. In this study, the authors compared the differences in gene expression between juvenile and adult dura mater using a mouse cDNA microarray with 42,000 unique elements.Non-suture-associated parietal bone was harvested from 6-day-old and 60-day-old mice. The dura mater was carefully dissected from the calvarial disk and snap-frozen. RNA was extracted from pooled dura mater for microarray analysis. The 25 most differentially expressed genes were listed, as were selected bone-related genes. In addition, quantitative real-time reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction confirmation of selected genes-BMP-2, BMP-4, and BMP-7; and osteopontin (OP), osteocalcin (OC), and FGFR-1-was performed.Juvenile dura mater expressed significantly greater amounts of BMP-2 and OP. Minimal difference in OC expression was observed between juvenile and adult dura mater. Extracellular matrix proteins (Col3a1, 5a1, 6a1, and fibronectin 1), osteoblast differentiation markers (Runx2/Cbfa1, Itm2a, and FGFR-1), and the growth factor Ptn were among other genes with greater expression in juvenile dura mater. Markers of osteoclasts (Acp5, MMP9, Ctsk) and the multiple candidate gene Ntrk2 were also expressed at higher levels in the juvenile dura mater.These findings suggest a more differentiated osteoprogenitor population to exist along with a greater presence of osteoclasts in the juvenile dura mater relative to adults. In addition to establishing a baseline difference in gene expression between juvenile and adult dura mater, new genes potentially critical to the regenerative potential of juvenile calvaria were identified.", "Effects of JAK3 inhibition with CP-690,550 on immune cell populations and their functions in nonhuman primate recipients of kidney allografts": "Janus Kinase (JAK) 3 is a tyrosine kinase essential for proper signal transduction downstream of selected cytokine receptors and for robust T-cell and natural killer cells activation and function. JAK3 inhibition with CP-690,550 prevents acute allograft rejection. To provide further insight into the mechanisms of efficacy, we investigated the immunomodulatory effects of CP-690,550 in vitro and in vivo in nonhuman primates.Pharmacodynamic assessments of lymphocyte activation, function, proliferation and phenotype were performed in three settings: in vitro in whole blood isolated from untransplanted cynomolgus monkeys (cynos), in vivo in blood from untransplanted cynos dosed with CP-690,550 for 8 days, and in vivo in blood from transplanted cynos immunosuppressed with CP-690,550. Cell surface activation markers expression, IL-2- enhanced IFN-gamma production, lymphocyte proliferation and immune cell phenotype analyzes were performed with multiparametric flow cytometry.In vitro exposure to CP-690,550 resulted in significant reduction of IL-2-enhanced IFN-gamma production by T-cells (maximum inhibition of 55-63%), T-cell surface expression of CD25 (50% inhibitory concentration (IC50); 0.18 microM) and CD71 (IC50; 1.6 microM), and T-cell proliferative capacities measured by proliferating cell nuclear antigen expression (IC50; 0.87 microM). Similar results were observed in animals dosed with CP-690,550. In addition, transplanted animals displayed significant reduction of NK cell (90% from baseline) and T-cell numbers whereas CD8 effector memory T-cell populations were unaffected.Potent in vitro and in vivo immunomodulatory effects of the JAK3 inhibitor CP-690,550 likely contribute to its efficacy in the prevention of organ allograft rejection.", "Smad3 signalling plays an important role in keloid pathogenesis via epithelial-mesenchymal interactions": "Smad signalling plays important roles in developmental and cancer biology as well as in fibropathogenesis. Its role in keloid biology is not known. Epithelial-mesenchymal interactions, originally described in normal skin, have recently been established to play a significant role in keloid pathogenesis, and demonstrate the important influence of keratinocyte paracrine factor signalling on fibroblast behaviour. The present study investigated the role of downstream Smad cascade induction in this interaction. Normal fibroblasts (NF) and keloid fibroblasts (KF) were co-cultured in serum-free medium with normal keratinocytes (NK) or keloid keratinocytes (KK) for 5 days, after which fibroblast cell lysates were subjected to western blot and immunoprecipitation analysis to quantify the levels of Smad and Smad2/3/4 binding complex. In another set of experiments, wild-type (wt), Smad2-null (Smad2-/-) and Smad3-null (Smad3-/-) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) were assayed for cell proliferation and collagen production after serum-free co-culture with KK or exposure to conditioned media collected from serum-free KK/KF co-culture. Compared to normal skin, keloids expressed high basal levels of TGFbetaR1 and TGFbetaR2, Smad2, 3 and 4 and phospho-Smad2. Upregulation of TGFbetaR1 and TGFbetaR2, Smad3 and p-Smad2 was observed in KF co-cultured with KK, together with enhanced Smad3 phosphorylation and Smad2/3/4 binding complex production. When MEF-wt, MEF-Smad2-/- or MEF-Smad3-/- were co-cultured with KK or exposed to KK/KF co-culture conditioned media, enhanced proliferation and collagen production were seen in MEF-wt and MEF-Smad2-/- but not in MEF-Smad3-/- cells. The activation of Smad signalling, importantly that of Smad3, appears to be one facet of the complex epithelial-mesenchymal interactions in keloid pathogenesis, resulting in active KF proliferation and collagen-ECM production in co-culture with KK. This finding suggests the suppression of Smad signalling as a novel approach in keloid therapy.", "Differential transcriptional expression profiles of juvenile and adult calvarial bone": "It has widely been observed that young children are capable of reossifying large calvarial defects, while adults lack this endogenous tissue-engineering capacity. The ability of juvenile animals to regenerate calvarial defects has been investigated in multiple animal models, including mice. In this study, the authors used cDNA microarrays to investigate the expression of osteogenesis-associated genes upstream and downstream of Runx2 in juvenile and adult mouse calvaria.Nonsuture-associated parietal bone discs were harvested from 6-day-old (n = 50) and 60-day-old (n = 35) male CD-1 mice. After separation of the underlying dura mater and overlying pericranium, the calvarial discs were snap-frozen and RNA was extracted from pooled samples of calvaria for microarray analysis. Genes analyzed included cytokines, receptors, and cell-surface and matrix proteins both upstream and downstream of Runx2.Genes associated with the Runx2 pathway had notably higher levels in the juvenile versus adult calvaria. All genes except for osteocalcin were expressed at least twofold higher in the juvenile calvaria. This pattern was validated with quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. In addition, mRNA for potent osteoinductive growth factors was present at higher levels in the juvenile compared with the adult calvaria.These findings reflect a genomic environment of active osteoblast differentiation and ossification in the juvenile calvaria compared with the adult \"quiescent\" calvarial tissue. These data suggest that a decreased osteogenic potential of adult calvarial osteoblasts may, in part, explain the inability of adult animals to heal calvarial defects.", "Bone morphogenetic protein 2 and retinoic acid accelerate in vivo bone formation, osteoclast recruitment, and bone turnover": "Reconstruction of craniofacial defects presents a substantial biomedical burden, and requires complex surgery. Interestingly, children after age 2 years and adults are unable to heal large skull defects. This nonhealing paradigm provides an excellent model system for craniofacial skeletal tissueengineering strategies. Previous studies have documented the in vivo osteogenic potential of adipose-derived stromal (ADS) cells and bone marrow-derived stromal (BMS) cells. This study investigates the ability to accelerate in vivo osteogenesis on ex vivo recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP-2) and retinoic acid stimulation. Mouse osteoblasts, ADS cells, and BMS cells were seeded onto apatite-coated PLGA scaffolds, stimulated with rhBMP-2 and retinoic acid ex vivo for 4 weeks, and subsequently implanted into critically sized (4 mm) calvarial defects. Samples were harvested after 2, 4, 8, and 12 weeks. Areas of complete bony bridging were noted as early as 2 weeks in vivo; however, osteoclasts were attracted to the scaffold as identified by calcitonin receptor staining and tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase activity staining. Although the optimal method of in vitro osteogenic priming for mesenchymal cells remains unknown, these results provide evidence that BMP-2 and retinoic acid stimulation of multipotent cells ex vivo can subsequently induce significant quantities of bone formation within a short time period in vivo.", "Applications of a mouse model of calvarial healing: Differences in regenerative abilities of juveniles and adults": "Young children are capable of healing large calvarial defects, whereas adults lack this endogenous osseous tissue-engineering capacity. Despite the important clinical implications, little is known about the molecular and cell biology underlying this differential ability. Traditionally, guinea pig, rabbit, and rat models have been used to study the orchestration of calvarial healing. To harness the research potential of knockout and transgenic mice, the authors developed a mouse model for calvarial healing. Nonsuture-associated parietal defects 3, 4, and 5 mm in diameter were made in both juvenile (6-day-old, n = 15) and adult (60-day-old, n = 15) mice. Calvariae were harvested after 8 weeks and analyzed radiographically and histologically. Percentage of healing was quantified using Scion Image software analysis of calvarial radiographs. A significant difference in the ability to heal calvarial defects was seen between 6-day-old and 60-day-old mice when 3-, 4-, or 5-mm defects were created. The authors' analysis revealed that juvenile mice healed a significantly greater percentage of their calvarial defects than adult mice (juvenile mean percentage of healing: 3-mm defects, 59 percent; 4-mm defects, 65 percent; 5-mm defects, 44 percent; adult mean percentage of healing: <5 percent in all groups; p < 0.05). All three defect sizes were found to be critical in the adult, whereas significant healing was seen regardless of the size of the defect in juvenile mice. The establishment of this model will facilitate further, detailed evaluation of the molecular biology underlying the different regenerative abilities of juvenile versus adult mice and enhance research into membranous bone induction by making available powerful tools such as knockout and transgenic animals.", "Adipose-derived adult stromal cells heal critical-size mouse calvarial defects": "In adults and children over two years of age, large cranial defects do not reossify successfully, posing a substantial biomedical burden. The osteogenic potential of bone marrow stromal (BMS) cells has been documented. This study investigates the in vivo osteogenic capability of adipose-derived adult stromal (ADAS) cells, BMS cells, calvarial-derived osteoblasts and dura mater cells to heal critical-size mouse calvarial defects. Implanted, apatite-coated, PLGA scaffolds seeded with ADAS or BMS cells produced significant intramembranous bone formation by 2 weeks and areas of complete bony bridging by 12 weeks as shown by X-ray analysis, histology and live micromolecular imaging. The contribution of implanted cells to new bone formation was 84-99% by chromosomal detection. These data show that ADAS cells heal critical-size skeletal defects without genetic manipulation or the addition of exogenous growth factors.", "Mechanisms of murine cranial suture patency mediated by a dominant negative transforming growth factor-beta receptor adenovirus": "Using a physiologic model of mouse cranial suture fusion, the authors' laboratory has previously demonstrated that transforming growth factor (TGF)-betas appear to be more abundantly expressed in the suture complex of the fusing posterior frontal compared with the patent sagittal suture. Furthermore, the authors have shown that by blocking TGF-beta signaling with a replication-deficient adenovirus encoding a defective, dominant negative type II TGF-beta receptor (AdDN-TbetaRII), posterior frontal suture fusion was inhibited. In this study, the authors attempt to further elucidate the role of TGF-beta in cranial suture fusion by investigating possible mechanisms of AdDN-TbetaRII-mediated cranial suture patency using both an established organ culture model and a novel in vitro co-culture system that recapitulates the in vivo anatomic dura mater/cranial suture relationship. In this article, the authors demonstrate that blocking TGF-beta signaling with the AdDN-TbetaRII construct led to inhibition of cellular proliferation in the suture mesenchyme and subjacent dura mater during the early period of predicted posterior frontal suture fusion. Interestingly, co-culture experiments revealed that transfecting osteoblasts with AdDN-TbetaRII led to alterations in the gene expression levels of two important bone-related molecules (Msx2 and osteopontin). Inhibiting TGF-beta signaling prevented time-dependent suppression of Msx2 and prevented induction of osteopontin, thereby retarding osteoblast differentiation. Furthermore, the authors demonstrated that the AdDN-TbetaRII construct was capable of blocking TGF-beta -mediated up-regulation of collagen IalphaI, an extracellular matrix molecule important for bone formation. Collectively, these data strongly suggest that AdDN-TbetaRII maintains posterior frontal patency, in part by altering early events in de novo bone formation, including cellular proliferation and early extracellular matrix production.", "In vitro murine posterior frontal suture fate is age-dependent: Implications for cranial suture biology": "In CD-1 mice, the posterior frontal suture (analogous to the human metopic suture) fuses while all other cranial sutures remain patent. In an in vitro organ culture model, the authors previously demonstrated that posterior frontal sutures explanted immediately before the onset of suture fusion (at 25 days old) mimic in vivo physiologic fusion. In the first portion of this study, the authors defined how early in development the posterior frontal suture fuses in their tension-free, serum-free organ culture system by serially analyzing posterior frontal suture fusion from calvariae explanted at different stages of postnatal development. Their results revealed a divergence of suture fate leading to abnormal patency or physiologic fusion between the first and second weeks of life, respectively, despite viability and continued growth of the calvarial explants in vitro. From these data, the authors postulated that the gene expression patterns present in the suture complex at the time of explant may determine whether the posterior frontal suture fuses or remains patent in organ culture. Therefore, to elucidate potentially important differences in gene expression within this \"window of opportunity,\" they performed a cDNA microarray analysis on 5-day-old and 15-day-old posterior frontal and sagittal whole suture complexes corresponding to the age ranges for unsuccessful (1 to 7 days old) and successful (14 to 21 days old) in vitro posterior frontal suture fusion. Overall, their microarray results reveal interesting differential expression patterns of candidate genes in different categories, including angiogenic cytokines and mechanosensitive genes potentially important in cranial suture biology.", "Postoperative rhabdomyolysis following laparoscopic gastric bypass in the morbidly obese": "Laparoscopic approaches for weight reduction in the morbidly obese have become common with more than 50,000 bariatric surgical procedures being performed in 2001. The objective of this article is to raise awareness among surgeons of a new complication of rhabdomyolysis from this frequent procedure.Case series extracted from surgical database from January 2, 2001, through December 31, 2002.We identified 5 cases of postoperative rhabdomyolysis in morbidly obese patients who underwent laparoscopic duodenal switch procedures with parietal gastrectomy. The cause, pathogenesis, and clinical features are reviewed and discussed.Postoperative rhabdomyolysis developed in 5 of 353 morbidly obese patients who underwent consecutive laparoscopic duodenal switch procedures, an incidence of 1.4%. All 5 patients were male, had a mean peak serum creatine kinase level of 19 680 U/L, and reported muscle pain in either the buttock, hip, or shoulder regions during the early postoperative period.We hypothesized that morbidly obese patients develop critical surface and deep tissue pressures during bariatric surgery, increasing their risk for tissue injury and rhabdomyolysis. Unexplained elevations in the serum creatinine level or reports of buttock, hip, or shoulder pain in the postoperative period should raise the possibility of rhabdomyolysis and prompt clinical investigation. We recommend routine preoperative and postoperative measurements of the serum creatine kinase and serum creatinine levels to aid detection. Surgeons need to keep a low index of suspicion because early diagnosis and treatment are the cornerstones of successful management of rhabdomyolysis.", "Physiological features of aging persons": "", "Roles of periosteum, dura, and adjacent bone on healing of cranial osteonecrosis - Discussion": ""}, "title": "Clinical Professor, Surgery - Vascular Surgery", "url": "https://profiles.stanford.edu/oliver-aalami", "image": "https://profiles.stanford.edu/proxy/api/cap/profiles/34839/resources/profilephoto/350x350.1645421604893.jpg", "email": [